---
layout: post
title:  "DPhil Thesis: Variational, Monte Carlo and Policy-Based Approaches to Bayesian Experimental Design"
date:   2022-04-02
categories: papers
external_url: https://ae-foster.github.io/assets/thesis.pdf
authors: Adam Foster
published: University of Oxford
thumbnail: assets/thesis-thumbnail.png
tag: paper
---

Experimentation is key to learning about our world, but careful design of experiments is critical to ensure
resources are used efficiently to conduct discerning investigations. Bayesian experimental design (BED)
is an elegant framework that provides a mathematical definition of the expected information gain (EIG)
of running a certain experiment. Finding the design with the maximal EIG will, in expectation, give
experimental outcomes that are most informative about the underlying phenomenon.
BED promises to launch a revolution in science and machine learning, but it is only beginning to realise
its potential due to numerous unsolved computational problems. One fundamental computational issue
is the estimation of EIG, where a naïve approach necessitates nested calculation of Bayesian posteriors.
Further computational challenges concern the optimisation of the EIG across design space, and the design
of adaptive experiments that use data that has been already observed to find the optimal design of the
next experiment.
In this thesis, we ask whether the machinery of modern machine learning can be brought to bear on
these computational challenges, demonstrating that significant advances are possible when modern ML
is combined with a deep understanding of BED. We begin by examining the EIG estimation problem,
being the first to apply variational inference and inference amortisation to the problem. We then turn to
optimisation of the EIG over a continuous design space, showing that stochastic gradient methods, which
have not been widely adopted in BED, combine with simultaneous optimisation of variational parameters
to great effect. Continuing on this theme, we show that it is possible to obtain unbiased gradients of
EIG using Multi-level Monte Carlo. For the adaptive design problem, a key limitation of most methods
is that they require substantial computation at each iteration of the experiment. We ask whether this
process itself cannot be amortised, ultimately deriving an algorithm that trains a design policy network
offline to be deployed with lightning-fast design decisions during a live experiment. Finally, we show how
this policy-driven approach extends to implicit models.
Together, these contributions move the field of Bayesian experimental design forward significantly in
terms of what is computationally possible. Our hope is that practitioners will be able to apply these
ideas to advance human understanding in many scientific disciplines.
<!--more-->
